Copyright (c) 2004-2006 Cray Inc.

This software and associated documentation files (the "Software") are
not to be redistributed without written permission from Cray Inc.

The Software is provided without the right to sublicense or distribute
and all rights to use the Software may be revoked by Cray at any time.
Title to the Software, and all rights not specifically granted to
Customer by this license, will remain in Cray and its suppliers.

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.  The
names of the authors may not be used to endorse or promote products
derived from this Software without specific prior written permission.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT,
INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
(INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING
IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

This constitutes the entire understanding of the parties with respect
to the Software, and supersedes all previous agreements, proposals,
oral or written, and all negotiations, conversations or discussions
heretofore had between the parties related to this Software.
