\sekshun{Organization}
\label{Organization}

This specification is organized as follows:
\begin{itemize}

\item
Section~\ref{Scope}, Scope, describes the scope of this specification.

\item
Section~\ref{Notation}, Notation, introduces the notation that is used
throughout this specification.

\item
Section~\ref{Organization}, Organization, describes the contents of
each of the sections within this specification.

\item
Section~\ref{Acknowledgments}, Acknowledgments, offers a note of
thanks to people and projects.

\item
Section~\ref{Language_Overview}, Language Overview, describes Chapel
at a high level.

\item
Section~\ref{Lexical_Structure}, Lexical Strucutre, describes the
lexical components of Chapel.

\item
Section~\ref{Types}, Types, describes the types in Chapel and defines
the primitive and enumerated types.

\item
Section~\ref{Variables}, Variables, describes variables and constants
in Chapel.

\item
Section~\ref{Conversions}, Conversions, describes the legal implicit
and explict conversions allowed between values of different types.
Chapel does not allow for user-defined conversions.

\item
Section~\ref{Expressions}, Expressions, describes the serial
expressions in Chapel.

\item
Section~\ref{Statements}, Statements, describes the serial statements
in Chapel.

\item
Section~\ref{Modules}, Modules, describes modules, Chapel's
abstraction to allow for name space management.

\item
Section~\ref{Functions}, Functions, describes functions and function
resolution in Chapel.

\item
Section~\ref{Classes}, Classes, describes reference classes in Chapel.

\item
Section~\ref{Records}, Records, describes records or value classes in
Chapel.

\item
Section~\ref{Unions}, Unions, describes unions in Chapel.

\item
Section~\ref{Tuples}, Tuples, describes tuples in Chapel.

\item
Section~\ref{Ranges}, Ranges, describes ranges in Chapel.

\item
Section~\ref{Domains_and_Arrays}, Domains and Arrays, describes
domains and arrays in Chapel.  Chapel arrays are more general than
arrays in many other languages.  Domains are index sets, an
abstraction that is typically not distinguished from arrays.

\item
Section~\ref{Iterators}, Iterators, describes iterator functions and a
class iterator interface in Chapel.

\item
Section~\ref{Generics}, Generics, describes Chapel's support for
generic functions and types.

\item
Section~\ref{Parallelism_and_Synchronization}, Parallelism and
Synchronization, describes parallel expressions and statements in
Chapel as well as synchronization constructs and atomic sections.

\item
Section~\ref{Locality_and_Distribution}, Locality and Distribution,
describes constructs for managing locality and distributing data in
Chapel.

\item
Section~\ref{Reductions_and_Scans}, Reductions and Scans, describes
the built-in reductions and scans as well as structural interfaces to
support user-defined reductions and scans.

\item
Section~\ref{Input_and_Output}, Input and Output, describes support
for input and output in Chapel, including file input and output..

\item
Section~\ref{Standard_Modules}, Standard Modules, describes the
standard modules that are provided with the Chapel language.

\end{itemize}
